# CleaningDataProject

## Introduction

This repository is the project assignment for the ***Getting and Cleaning Data*** course in Coursera.

## Original Data

The original data and its description is posted at:

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

Additional details can be found in the following link:

https://www.elen.ucl.ac.be/Proceedings/esann/esannpdf/es2013-84.pdf

## Repository Content:

1. README.md

2. CodeBook.md : Contains some information about the features selection and how we clean the data.

3. run_analysis.R : The R code used to generate the tidy dataset. It contains self-explanatory comments. To
   run the code in R:

   ```source("run_analysis.R")```

4. tidy.mean.only.txt : The output generated by the R code ***run_analysis.R*** 

## Assignment:

1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.

2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.

3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set

4. Label the data set with descriptive variable names.

5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with
the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

## About the dataset:

### Files and Folders Structure

1. 'README.txt' : It contains some information regarding to the dataset.

2. 'activity_labels.txt' : Provides a list of activities and associate them with a number. 

3. 'features_info.txt': It contains information about the variables in the dataset.

4. 'features.txt': Show all the variables in the dataset.

5. 'train/X_train.txt': Training dataset.

6. 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.

7. 'test/X_test.txt': Test dataset.

8. 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.


# Following the Assignment Steps:

# How We Clean the Data
Exploring a little bit the dataset, there are two folders of interest mentioned in **features_info.txt**:

```
test/:
'Inertial Signals'
subject_test.txt
X_test.txt
y_test.txt

train/:
'Inertial Signals'
subject_train.txt
X_train.txt
y_train.txt
```

The files **X_test.txt** and **X_train.txt** contains the data of the variables defined above. Both files have the
same number of columns, and their names are clearly defined in **features.txt**.  The files **subject_test.txt**
and **y_train.txt** in each folder contains the individuals ID and their activities they performed during the
measurement.  Thus, the final goal is to merge the test and train datasets such that a table with an ordered data 
in the following order: Subject, Activity, mean1, std1, mean2, std2, ..., meanN, stdN.

To make it so, the file **features.txt** will be critical here.  Thus, using R a possible approach would be as follows:

1. Read the file **features.txt** and put content into an object called *features*.

   - ```features<-read.table("features.txt")```

2. In each folder (test and train):
    
    - Read file **subject_{test,train}.txt** and post content into an object called *subject.{test,train}*.
     
    - Change the colum name as "Subject".
      
    - Read file **y_{test,train}.txt** and post content into an object called *activities.{test,train}*.
    
    - Change the colum name as "Activity".
    
    - Read file **x_{test,train}.txt** and post content into an object called *{test,train}*
    
    - Change the colums names using columns names in the object *features*.
    
    - Once all the steps above are done, create a dataframe. 1 for test and 1 for train (test.dataset, train.dataset).
    
      ```subject.train <- read.table("train/subject_train.txt", header=FALSE)```
      
      ```names(subject.train)<-"Subject"```
      
      ```activities.train <- read.table("train/y_train.txt")```
      
      ```names(activities.train) <- "Activity"```
      
      ```train <-read.table("train/X_train.txt")```
      
      ```names(train) <- features$V2```
      
      ```train.dataset <- data.frame(subject.train, activities.train, train)```

3. Merge dataframes and sort the output by Subject and Activity.

    - ```tidy.dataset <- rbind(train.dataset, test.dataset)```

4. Extract measurements that have mean and standard deviation.

    - ```tidy.dataset.reduced <- tidy.dataset[ c(1,2, grep("mean[.]|std[.]", names(tidy.dataset)))]```

5. Uses descriptive activity names from **activity_labels.txt** to name the activities in the data set

    - ```activities.labels <- read.table("activity_labels.txt")```                                                                  
    - ```tidy.dataset.reduced$Activity <- as.factor(tidy.dataset.reduced$Activity)```
    - ```levels(tidy.dataset.reduced$Activity) <- c(levels(activities.labels$V2))```   

6. After the merge, we clean the column names to make them more readable.

   - ```names(tidy.dataset.reduced) <- gsub("mean.[.]", "mean", names(tidy.dataset.reduced))```
   - ```names(tidy.dataset.reduced) <- gsub("std.[.]", "std", names(tidy.dataset.reduced))```

7. From the dataset created in item 6, we generated a dataset with the average only. Make sure proper names 
are assigned to make the columns easy to identify, and then compute average for each variable according to subject 
and activity:

   - Rename columns names. Add the string "average-" at the beginning of each variable.
   - Use two for loops One for subject and one for activity. And then use apply() to compute average per column.
   - Update the name of the columns.

8. Save the data into a text file for record.

   - ```write.table(tidy.dataset.reduced2, "tidy.mean.only.txt", row.name=FALSE)```  

# Columns Names in Data from item 7

> names(tidy.data)
 [1] "Subject"                                            
 [2] "Activity"                                           
 [3] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometer.mean.X"               
 [4] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometer.mean.Y"               
 [5] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometer.mean.Z"               
 [6] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometer.std.X"                
 [7] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometer.std.Y"                
 [8] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometer.std.Z"                
 [9] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometer.mean.X"            
[10] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometer.mean.Y"            
[11] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometer.mean.Z"            
[12] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometer.std.X"             
[13] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometer.std.Y"             
[14] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometer.std.Z"             
[15] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.X"           
[16] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Y"           
[17] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Z"           
[18] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.X"            
[19] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Y"            
[20] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Z"            
[21] "average-TimeBodyGyroscope.mean.X"                   
[22] "average-TimeBodyGyroscope.mean.Y"                   
[23] "average-TimeBodyGyroscope.mean.Z"                   
[24] "average-TimeBodyGyroscope.std.X"                    
[25] "average-TimeBodyGyroscope.std.Y"                    
[26] "average-TimeBodyGyroscope.std.Z"                    
[27] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.mean.X"               
[28] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.mean.Y"               
[29] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.mean.Z"               
[30] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.std.X"                
[31] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.std.Y"                
[32] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerk.std.Z"                
[33] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerMagnitude.mean"        
[34] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerMagnitude.std"         
[35] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometerMagnitude.mean"     
[36] "average-TimeGravityAccelerometerMagnitude.std"      
[37] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude.mean"    
[38] "average-TimeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude.std"     
[39] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeMagnitude.mean"            
[40] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeMagnitude.std"             
[41] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude.mean"        
[42] "average-TimeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude.std"         
[43] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.mean.X"           
[44] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.mean.Y"           
[45] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.mean.Z"           
[46] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.std.X"            
[47] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.std.Y"            
[48] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometer.std.Z"            
[49] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.X"       
[50] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Y"       
[51] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.mean.Z"       
[52] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.X"        
[53] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Y"        
[54] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerk.std.Z"        
[55] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.mean.X"               
[56] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.mean.Y"               
[57] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.mean.Z"               
[58] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.std.X"                
[59] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.std.Y"                
[60] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscope.std.Z"                
[61] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitude.mean"    
[62] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitude.std"     
[63] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude.mean"
[64] "average-FrequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude.std"
[65] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscopeMagnitude.mean"        
[66] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscopeMagnitude.std"         
[67] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude.mean"    
[68] "average-FrequencyBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude.std"     
